Relay on recording rules for metrics (#1668)
scylladb/scylla-monitoring: docs/source/upgrade/upgrade-guide-from-monitoring-3.x-to-monitoring-4.y.rst

==============================================================
Upgrade Guide - Scylla Monitoring 3.x to Scylla Monitoring 4.y
==============================================================

> This document is a step by step procedure for upgrading `Scylla Monitoring Stack </operating-scylla/monitoring/3.0>`_ from version 3.x to 3.y, for example, between 3.0 to 3.0.1.

Reviewer: This is confusing.
Do you mean 3.0.0 to 3.0.1? 
Is it a PATCH version upgrade, MINOR or both
https://semver.org/

Upgrade Procedure
=================

> We recommend installing the new release next to the old one, running both in parallel, and making sure it is working as expected before uninstalling the old version.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We recommend installing the new release next to the old one, running both in parallel, and ensuring it is working as expected before uninstalling the old version.
```

Change to the directory you want to install the new Monitoring stack.
Download the latest release:
You can download the .zip or the .tar.

Install 4.y (The new version)
-----------------------------

.. code-block:: bash

                wget -L https://github.com/scylladb/scylla-monitoring/archive/scylla-monitoring-4.y.zip
                unzip scylla-monitoring-4.y.zip
                cd scylla-monitoring-scylla-monitoring-4.y/

Replace “y” with the new minor release number, for example, 4.0.0.zip

Setting the server's files
--------------------------

Copy the ``scylla_servers.yml`` and ``scylla_manager_servers.yml`` from the version that is already installed.

.. code-block:: bash

                cp /path/to/monitoring/3.x/prometheus/scylla_servers.yml prometheus/
                cp /path/to/monitoring/3.x/prometheus/scylla_manager_servers.yml.yml prometheus/

Validate the new version is running the correct version
-------------------------------------------------------

> Starting from Scylla-Monitoring version 2.2, you can run:

Reviewer: Since the upgrade doc is only from 3.x to 4.y, no need to comment about 2.2

.. code-block:: bash

                ./start-all.sh --version

To validate the Scylla-Monitoring version.

Validate the version installed correctly
----------------------------------------

To validate that the Monitoring stack starts correctly, first in parallel to the current (3.x) stack.

.. code-block:: bash

                ./start-all.sh -p 9091 -g 3001 -m 9095

Browse to ``http://{ip}:9091``
And check the Grafana dashboard

Note that we are using different port numbers for Grafana, Prometheus, and the Alertmanager.

.. caution::

   Important: do not use the local dir flag when testing!

When you are satisfied with the data in the dashboard, you can shut down the containers.

.. caution::

>    Important: Do not kill the 3.x version that is currently running.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   Important: Do not kill the 3.x version currently running.
```

Killing the new 4.y Monitoring stack in testing mode
----------------------------------------------------

Use the following command to kill the containers:

.. code-block:: bash

                ./kill-all.sh -p 9091 -g 3001 -m 9095

You can start and stop the new 3.y version while testing.

Move to version 4.y (the new version)
-------------------------------------

> Note: migrating will cause a few seconds of blackout in the system.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note: migrating will cause a few seconds of monitoring blackout.
```

We assume that you are using external volume to store the metrics data.

Kill all containers
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> At this point you have two monitoring stacks running side by side, you should kill both before

Reviewer: ```suggestion
At this point, you have two monitoring stacks running side by side; you should kill both before
```

continuing.

Kill the newer version that runs in testing mode by following the instructions on how to `Killing the new 4.y Monitoring stack in testing mode`_
in the previous section

kill the older 3.x version containers by running:

.. code-block:: bash

                ./kill-all.sh

Start version 4.y in normal mode

From the new root of the `scylla-monitoring-scylla-monitoring-4.y` run

.. code-block:: bash

                ./start-all.sh -d /path/to/data/dir

Point your browser to ``http://{ip}:3000`` and see that the data is there.

Rollback to version 3.x
-----------------------

To rollback during the testing mode, follow `Killing the new 4.y Monitoring stack in testing mode`_ as explained previously
and the system will continue to operate normally.

To rollback to version 3.x after you completed the moving to version 4.y (as shown above).
Run:

.. code-block:: bash

                ./kill-all.sh
                cd /path/to/scylla-grafana-3.x/
                ./start-all.sh -d /path/to/data/dir

Post-installation: Metrics back-filling
=======================================

> Starting from Scylla Monitoring version 3.8, Scylla Monitoring uses Prometheus's recording rules for performance reasons.

Reviewer: So is this procedure limited for 3.8 and 3.9 to 4.x?
If so we need to explicitly state so at the top

Author: Maybe I should add more text around it, but it's true for any upgrade to 4.0.
The procedure is also general, so if, in the future we'll add more recording rules the same mechanism would work.

> Recording rules perform some of the calculations when collecting the metrics instead of when showing the dashboards.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Recording rules allow you to precompute frequently needed or computationally expensive expressions and save their result as a new set of time series. 

Querying the precomputed result will then often be much faster than executing the original expression every time it is needed. This is especially useful for dashboards, which need to query the same expression repeatedly every time they refresh.

Source: `Prometheus docs <https://prometheus.io/docs/prometheus/latest/configuration/recording_rules/#recording-rules>`_
```

Reviewer: Can you add an example for such a rule?

> For a transition period, Scylla Monitoring version 3.x has a fall-back mechanism that if those recording rules

Reviewer: is it all 3.x or just 3.8, 3.9?

Author: all versions prior to 4.0 does not relay solly on recording rules (before 3.8 there are no recording rules)

are not present data will still be shown.

Scylla Monitoring versions 4.0 and newer will rely only on recording rules.

    .. note::

>        If you upgrade from a version older than 3.8 without back-filling, latency historical data will not be shown.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
       Historical latency data will not be shown if you upgrade from a version older than 3.8 without back-filling.
```

> The following instructions are only relevant if you are upgrading from a version older than 3.8 to a version 4.0 or higher,
> or if you are looking at historical data collected before you upgraded to 3.8.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following instructions are only relevant if you upgrade from a version older than 3.8 to version 4.0 or higher or look at historical data collected before upgrading to 3.8.
```

For example, you keep your data (retention period) for a year, and you upgraded to version 3.8 three months ago.

> In this example you have recording rules data only for the last three months, to be able to look at older latency

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this example, you have recording rules data only for the last three months, to be able to look at older latency
```

information you will need to back-fill that missing period.

The following instructions are based on the recording rules backfilling section in the `Prometheus documentation`_.

.. _`Prometheus documentation` : https://prometheus.io/docs/prometheus/latest/storage/#backfilling-for-recording-rules

Determine the backfilling period
--------------------------------

> When you run the backfilling process you need to determine the start time and end time.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When you run the backfilling process you need to determine the start and end times.
```

Determine the start time
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
The start time is your Prometheus retention time, by default it is set to 15 days. if you are not sure, you can check by
login into your Prometheus server: `http://{ip}:9090/status`.
If you are running Scylla Monitoring version 3.8 or newer for longer than the retention period, you are done! skip the rest of this section.

For the rest of this example, we will assume that your retention time is 360 days.

Determine the end time
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
Typically, you need to back-fill the recording rules when you are using a long retention period, for example, you have a year of retention data,
and you upgraded to Scylla Monitoring 3.8 about three months ago.

If you open the Overview dashboard and look at your entire retention time (in our example 1 year) you will see that while most of the graphs do
show the data, the latency graphs have a missing period, in our example - from the entire year, the latency graph will only show the last three months.

.. figure:: before-backfilling.png
   :width: 400pt

>    This is an example of missing latency graph

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   This is an example of a missing latency graph
```

That nine months gap (12 months minus 3) is what we want to fill with back-filling.

The point in time that the graphs start will be your back-filling end time. Check in the graph for the exact time.

Backfilling Process
-------------------
backup
^^^^^^
If you have a long retention period you are using an external directory that holds the Prometheus data, back it up, in case

> something would go wrong in the process you can revert the process.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you have a long retention period, you are using an external directory that holds the Prometheus data back it up; if something goes wrong in the process, you can revert the process.
```

To complete the process you will need to restart the monitoring stack at least once, if you are not using an external directory (The ``-d``
command-line option) You cannot complete it.

Restart the monitoring stack
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
You need to stop the monitoring stack and run the ``stat-all.sh`` command with an additional flag:
``-b "--storage.tsdb.allow-overlapping-blocks"``

Create the data files
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> We are going to use the promtool utility, if you are using the docker container, it's already installed for you.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We will use the Promtool utility; it's already installed for you if you are using the docker container. 
```

> We are going to use the promtool utility, if you are using the docker container, it's already installed for you.

Reviewer: Add link to the tool page

Author: There is a link to the prometheus documentation that covers all this process

.. code-block:: bash

                docker exec -it aprom sh
                cd /prometheus/data/
                promtool tsdb create-blocks-from rules \
                --start $start \
                --end $end \
                --url http://localhost:9090 \
                /etc/prometheus/prom_rules/back_fill/3.8/rules.1.yml

It will create a ``data`` directory in the directory you run it.
The reason to run it under the ``/prometheus/data/`` is you can be sure Prometheus has write privileges there.

    .. note::
       Depending on the time range and the number of cores, the process can take a long time. During testing it took an hour for every week of data,
       for a cluster with a total of 100 cores. Make sure that the creation process is not inerupt. You can split the time range to smaller durations
       (e.g. instead of an entire year, do it a weeks at a time).

Copy the data files
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
Make sure that the process completed successfully, don't start this section before you completed the previous sections.

copy the data files to the Prometheus directory

.. code-block:: bash

                cp data/* .

> The rules will be evaluated next time Prometheus will perform compaction. You can force it by restart the server using ``docker restart aprom``

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The rules will be evaluated next time Prometheus will perform compaction. You can force it by restarting the server using ``docker restart aprom``
```

Follow the logs ``docker logs aprom`` to see that the process works as expected. If there are no errors, you should now be able to
see the latency graphs over your entire retention time.

.. figure:: after-backfilling.jpg
   :width: 400pt

   Un example: after loading half of the data

> Related Links

Reviewer: I do not think we need this section.
We have the left menu for this

==============================================================
Upgrade Guide - Scylla Monitoring 3.x to Scylla Monitoring 4.y
==============================================================

> This document is a step by step procedure for upgrading `Scylla Monitoring Stack </operating-scylla/monitoring/3.0>`_ from version 3.x to 3.y, for example, between 3.0 to 3.0.1.

Reviewer 2: Is that correct? Later on, we tell the user to install 4.y.
I THINK it should be:
This document is a step-by-step procedure for upgrading `Scylla Monitoring Stack </operating-scylla/monitoring/3.0>`_ from version 3.x to 4.y.

Upgrade Procedure
=================

We recommend installing the new release next to the old one, running both in parallel, and making sure it is working as expected before uninstalling the old version.

Change to the directory you want to install the new Monitoring stack.

> Download the latest release:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Download the latest release
```

> You can download the .zip or the .tar.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
in the .zip or .tar format.
```

Install 4.y (The new version)
-----------------------------

.. code-block:: bash

                wget -L https://github.com/scylladb/scylla-monitoring/archive/scylla-monitoring-4.y.zip
                unzip scylla-monitoring-4.y.zip
                cd scylla-monitoring-scylla-monitoring-4.y/

Replace “y” with the new minor release number, for example, 4.0.0.zip

Setting the server's files
--------------------------

Copy the ``scylla_servers.yml`` and ``scylla_manager_servers.yml`` from the version that is already installed.

.. code-block:: bash

                cp /path/to/monitoring/3.x/prometheus/scylla_servers.yml prometheus/
                cp /path/to/monitoring/3.x/prometheus/scylla_manager_servers.yml.yml prometheus/

Validate the new version is running the correct version
-------------------------------------------------------

Starting from Scylla-Monitoring version 2.2, you can run:

.. code-block:: bash

                ./start-all.sh --version

To validate the Scylla-Monitoring version.

Validate the version installed correctly
----------------------------------------

> To validate that the Monitoring stack starts correctly, first in parallel to the current (3.x) stack.

Reviewer 2: I don't quite understand "first in parallel to the current (3.x) stack".
Should it be "first in parallel to the current (3.x) stack"?

.. code-block:: bash

                ./start-all.sh -p 9091 -g 3001 -m 9095

Browse to ``http://{ip}:9091``

> And check the Grafana dashboard

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
and check the Grafana dashboard.
```

Note that we are using different port numbers for Grafana, Prometheus, and the Alertmanager.

.. caution::

   Important: do not use the local dir flag when testing!

When you are satisfied with the data in the dashboard, you can shut down the containers.

.. caution::

   Important: Do not kill the 3.x version that is currently running.

Killing the new 4.y Monitoring stack in testing mode
----------------------------------------------------

Use the following command to kill the containers:

.. code-block:: bash

                ./kill-all.sh -p 9091 -g 3001 -m 9095

> You can start and stop the new 3.y version while testing.

Reviewer 2: I THINK it should be "the new 4.y version".

Move to version 4.y (the new version)
-------------------------------------

Note: migrating will cause a few seconds of blackout in the system.

We assume that you are using external volume to store the metrics data.

Kill all containers
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

At this point you have two monitoring stacks running side by side, you should kill both before
continuing.

> Kill the newer version that runs in testing mode by following the instructions on how to `Killing the new 4.y Monitoring stack in testing mode`_

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
#. Kill the newer version that runs in testing mode by following the instructions on how to `Killing the new 4.y Monitoring stack in testing mode`_
```

Reviewer 2: I'm adding #. to turn it into a numbered list for clarity.

Author: I couldn't make it a continues numbered list, after other changes I hope it's no longer needed

Reviewer 2: I don't know why it wouldn't render. Each #. should be converted to a number. We can skip it in this document, but using a numbered list for a sequence of steps is a good practice :)

> in the previous section

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
in the previous section.
```

> kill the older 3.x version containers by running:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
#. Kill the older 3.x version containers by running:
```

.. code-block:: bash

                ./kill-all.sh

> Start version 4.y in normal mode

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
#. Start version 4.y in normal mode.
```

> From the new root of the `scylla-monitoring-scylla-monitoring-4.y` run

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
#. From the new root of the `scylla-monitoring-scylla-monitoring-4.y` run:
```

.. code-block:: bash

                ./start-all.sh -d /path/to/data/dir

> Point your browser to ``http://{ip}:3000`` and see that the data is there.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
#. Point your browser to ``http://{ip}:3000`` and check that the data is there.
```

Rollback to version 3.x
-----------------------

To rollback during the testing mode, follow `Killing the new 4.y Monitoring stack in testing mode`_ as explained previously
and the system will continue to operate normally.

> To rollback to version 3.x after you completed the moving to version 4.y (as shown above).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To rollback to version 3.x after you completed moving to version 4.y (as shown above),
```

> Run:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
run:
```

are not present data will still be shown.

Scylla Monitoring versions 4.0 and newer will rely only on recording rules.

    .. note::
       If you upgrade from a version older than 3.8 without back-filling, latency historical data will not be shown.

The following instructions are only relevant if you are upgrading from a version older than 3.8 to a version 4.0 or higher,
or if you are looking at historical data collected before you upgraded to 3.8.

For example, you keep your data (retention period) for a year, and you upgraded to version 3.8 three months ago.

In this example you have recording rules data only for the last three months, to be able to look at older latency
information you will need to back-fill that missing period.

The following instructions are based on the recording rules backfilling section in the `Prometheus documentation`_.

.. _`Prometheus documentation` : https://prometheus.io/docs/prometheus/latest/storage/#backfilling-for-recording-rules

Determine the backfilling period
--------------------------------
When you run the backfilling process you need to determine the start time and end time.

Determine the start time
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> The start time is your Prometheus retention time, by default it is set to 15 days. if you are not sure, you can check by

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The start time is your Prometheus retention time, by default it is set to 15 days. If you are not sure what the start day is, you can check by
```

> login into your Prometheus server: `http://{ip}:9090/status`.

Reviewer 2: Please add an empty line after this line.

> If you are running Scylla Monitoring version 3.8 or newer for longer than the retention period, you are done! skip the rest of this section.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If you are running Scylla Monitoring version 3.8 or newer for longer than the retention period, you are done! You can skip the rest of this section.
```

Typically, you need to back-fill the recording rules when you are using a long retention period, for example, you have a year of retention data,
and you upgraded to Scylla Monitoring 3.8 about three months ago.

If you open the Overview dashboard and look at your entire retention time (in our example 1 year) you will see that while most of the graphs do
show the data, the latency graphs have a missing period, in our example - from the entire year, the latency graph will only show the last three months.

.. figure:: before-backfilling.png
   :width: 400pt

   This is an example of missing latency graph

That nine months gap (12 months minus 3) is what we want to fill with back-filling.

The point in time that the graphs start will be your back-filling end time. Check in the graph for the exact time.

Backfilling Process
-------------------
backup
^^^^^^
If you have a long retention period you are using an external directory that holds the Prometheus data, back it up, in case
something would go wrong in the process you can revert the process.

To complete the process you will need to restart the monitoring stack at least once, if you are not using an external directory (The ``-d``

> command-line option) You cannot complete it.

Reviewer 2: Something's wrong with this sentence, but I'm not sure how to fix it. Perhaps it should be:
To complete the process you will need to restart the monitoring stack at least once. If you are not using an external directory (the ``-d``
command-line option), you cannot complete it.

Restart the monitoring stack
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> You need to stop the monitoring stack and run the ``stat-all.sh`` command with an additional flag:

Reviewer 2: Please add an empty line after this line.

``-b "--storage.tsdb.allow-overlapping-blocks"``

Create the data files
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
We are going to use the promtool utility, if you are using the docker container, it's already installed for you.
You will need the start time and end time for the process, in our example the start time is 360 days ago and the end time is 90 days ago.

> The start and end times are in epoc, you will need to translate time to epoc, there are many ways to do this, for example, you can do

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The start and end times are in epoc, so you will need to translate the times to epoc.  There are many ways to do this - for example,
```

> it from the command line, this is how you get the epoc time for 90 days ago is: ``echo $((`date +%s` - 3600*24*90))``

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
from the command line. Run the following command to get the epoc time for 90 days ago: 

``echo $((`date +%s` - 3600*24*90))``
```

> login to your docker container and perform the following, ``start`` and ``end`` should be the start and end in epoc time.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Log in to your docker container and run the following (``start`` and ``end`` should be the start and end in epoc time):
```

.. code-block:: bash

                docker exec -it aprom sh
                cd /prometheus/data/
                promtool tsdb create-blocks-from rules \
                --start $start \
                --end $end \
                --url http://localhost:9090 \
                /etc/prometheus/prom_rules/back_fill/3.8/rules.1.yml

> It will create a ``data`` directory in the directory you run it.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
It will create a ``data`` directory in the directory where you run it.
```

The reason to run it under the ``/prometheus/data/`` is you can be sure Prometheus has write privileges there.

    .. note::
       Depending on the time range and the number of cores, the process can take a long time. During testing it took an hour for every week of data,
       for a cluster with a total of 100 cores. Make sure that the creation process is not inerupt. You can split the time range to smaller durations
       (e.g. instead of an entire year, do it a weeks at a time).

Copy the data files
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> Make sure that the process completed successfully, don't start this section before you completed the previous sections.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Make sure that the process is completed successfully - don't start this section before you complete the previous sections.
```

> copy the data files to the Prometheus directory

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Copy the data files to the Prometheus directory:
```

=================

We recommend installing the new release next to the old one. You can run both monitoring stacks in parallel, ensuring it is working as expected before uninstalling the old version.

Change to the directory you want to install the new Monitoring stack.
Download the latest release in the .zip or .tar format.

Install 4.y (The new version)
-----------------------------

.. code-block:: bash

                wget -L https://github.com/scylladb/scylla-monitoring/archive/scylla-monitoring-4.y.zip
                unzip scylla-monitoring-4.y.zip
                cd scylla-monitoring-scylla-monitoring-4.y/

Replace “y” with the new minor and patch release number, for example, 4.0.0.zip

Setting the server's files
--------------------------

Copy the ``scylla_servers.yml`` and ``scylla_manager_servers.yml`` from the version that is already installed.

.. code-block:: bash

                cp /path/to/monitoring/3.x/prometheus/scylla_servers.yml prometheus/
                cp /path/to/monitoring/3.x/prometheus/scylla_manager_servers.yml.yml prometheus/

Validate the new version is running the correct version
-------------------------------------------------------

> run:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Run:
```

Author: lol, you changed it from Run to run in the previous review

.. code-block:: bash

                ./start-all.sh --version

To validate the Scylla-Monitoring version.

Running in test mode
====================

This section is optional. It shows you how to run two monitoring stacks side by side. You can skip this section entirely and move to
switching to the new version section.

Running second monitoring stack
--------------------------------

We need to use different ports to run two monitoring stacks in parallel (i.e., the older 3.x version and the new 4.x stack).

.. code-block:: bash

                ./start-all.sh -p 9091 -g 3001 -m 9095

> Browse to ``http://{ip}:9091`` and check the Grafana dashboard

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Browse to ``http://{ip}:9091`` and check the Grafana dashboard.
```

Note that we are using different port numbers for Grafana, Prometheus, and the Alertmanager.

.. caution::

   Important: do not use the local dir flag when testing!

When you are satisfied with the data in the dashboard, you can shut down the containers.

.. caution::

   Important: Do not kill the 3.x version that is currently running!

Killing the new 4.y Monitoring stack in testing mode
----------------------------------------------------

Use the following command to kill the containers:

.. code-block:: bash

                ./kill-all.sh -p 9091 -g 3001 -m 9095

> You can start and stop the new 3.y version while testing.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can start and stop the new 4.y version while testing.
```

Backup
^^^^^^

We suggest to copy the Prometheus external directory first and use the copy as the data directory for the new monitoring stack.
Newer Monitoring stack uses newer Promethues versions, and keeping a backup of the prometheus dir would allow you to rollback.

Kill all containers
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

At this point you have two monitoring stacks installed with the older version running.

If you run the new version in testing mode kill it by following the instructions on how to `Killing the new 4.y Monitoring stack in testing mode`_
in the previous section.

kill the older 3.x version containers by running:

.. code-block:: bash

                ./kill-all.sh

Start version 4.y in normal mode

From the new root of the `scylla-monitoring-scylla-monitoring-4.y` run

.. code-block:: bash

                ./start-all.sh -d /path/to/copy/data/dir

Point your browser to ``http://{ip}:3000`` and see that the data is there.

Rollback to version 3.x
-----------------------

To rollback during the testing mode, follow `Killing the new 4.y Monitoring stack in testing mode`_ as explained previously
and the system will continue to operate normally.

> To rollback to version 3.x after you completed moving to version 4.y (as shown above).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To rollback to version 3.x after you completed moving to version 4.y (as shown above), run:
```

> run:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

.. figure:: before-backfilling.png
   :width: 400pt

   **This is an example of missing latency graph**

The following instructions are only relevant if you are upgrading from a version older than 3.8 to version 4.0 or higher,
or if you are looking at historical data collected before you upgraded to 3.8.

For example, you keep your data (retention period) for a year, and you upgraded to version 3.8 three months ago.

In this example you have recording rules data only for the last three months, to be able to look at older latency
information you will need to back-fill that missing period.

The following instructions are based on the recording rules backfilling section in the `Prometheus documentation`_.

.. _`Prometheus documentation` : https://prometheus.io/docs/prometheus/latest/storage/#backfilling-for-recording-rules

Determine the backfilling period
--------------------------------
When you run the backfilling process you need to determine the start time and end time.

Determine the start time
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
The start time is your Prometheus retention time, by default it is set to 15 days. if you are not sure what Prometheus retention time is, you can check by

> login into your Prometheus server: `http://{ip}:9090/status`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
logging in to your Prometheus server: `http://{ip}:9090/status`.
```
